[DOC]Restructuring (#3890)
pachyderm/pachyderm: doc/concepts/data-concepts/provenance.md

# Provenance

Data versioning enables Pachyderm users to go back in time and see the state
of a dataset or repository at a particular moment in time. Data provenance
(from the French *provenir* which means *the place of origin*),
also known as data lineage, tracks the dependencies and relationships

> between datasets. Provenance answers not only the question of

Reviewer: italicize "between" for emphasis?

and the results in the other
repository.

Collaboration takes data provenance even further. Provenance enables teams
of data scientists across the globe to build on each other work, share,
transform, and update datasets while automatically maintaining a
complete audit trail so that all results are reproducible.

The following diagram demonstrates how provenance works:

![Provenance example](../../images/provenance.png)

In the diagram above, you can see two input repositories called `parameters`
and `training-data`. The `training-data` repository continuously collects
data from an outside source. The training model pipeline combines the
data from these two repositories, trains many models, and runs tests to select the best
one.

Provenance helps you to understand how and why the best model was
selected and enables you to track the origin of the best model.
In the diagram above, the best model is represented with a purple
circle. By using provenance, you can find that the best model was
created from the commit **2** in the `training-data` repository
and the commit **1** in the `parameters` repository.

## Tracking the Provenance Upstream

> Pachyderm provides the `pachctl inspect` command that enables you to track

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pachyderm provides the `pachctl inspect commit` command that enables you to track
```

the provenance of your commits and learn where the data in the repository

> originates in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
originated.
```

**Example:**

```bash
$ pachctl inspect commit split@master
Commit: split@f71e42704b734598a89c02026c8f7d13
Original Branch: master
Started: 4 minutes ago
Finished: 3 minutes ago
Size: 0B
Provenance:  __spec__@8c6440f52a2d4aa3980163e25557b4a1 (split)  raw_data@ccf82debb4b94ca3bfe165aca8d517c3 (master)
```

In the example above, you can see that the latest commit in the master
branch of the split repository tracks back to the master branch in the

> `raw_data` repository.

Reviewer: Do we want to also mention the "spec" commit? say:

The "spec" provenance also shows you exactly what version of your code was run on the input commit (`raw_data@ccf82debb4b94ca3bfe165aca8d517c3`) to produce the output commit (`split@f71e42704b734598a89c02026c8f7d13`)

# Provenance

> Provenance enables Pachyderm users to go back in time and see the state of

Reviewer: This paragraph is awesome! This is really well-captured. A few tweaks to improve the accuracy slightly:

Data Versioning enables Pachyderm users to go back in time and see the state of a
data set (repo) at a particular moment in time.  Data Provenance (aka: Data Lineage) (if we want to be pretentious we can say "from the french word _provenir_ which means _the place of origin_ "-- since provenance isn't a word everyone actually knows)  tracks the
dependencies and relationships _between_ datasets.

Provenance answers not only the question of where the data comes from,
but also how the data was transformed along the way. Data scientists use provenance in
root cause analysis to improve code, workflows, and their understanding of the data and its implications on final results. Data scientists need to have confidence in the information with which they operate. They need
to be able to reproduce the results and sometimes go through the whole
data transformation process from scratch multiple times, which makes data
provenance one of the most critical aspects of data analysis. If your
computations result in unexpected numbers, the first place to look
is the historical data and code that gives insights into possible flaws in the
transformation chain or the data itself.

data at a particular moment in the past. Data scientists use provenance in
root cause analysis, as well as to improve their software code.
Provenance tracks the
dependency between datasets and determines their origins. Therefore,
provenance answers not only the question of where the data comes from,
but also how the data was transformed along the way. Data scientists need
to have confidence in the information with which they operate. They need
to be able to reproduce the results and sometimes go through the whole
data transformation process from scratch multiple times, which makes data
provenance one of the most critical aspects of data analysis. If your
computations result in unexpected numbers, the first place to look
is the historical data that gives insights into possible flaws in the
transformation chain or the data itself.

> When a bank makes a decision about a mortgage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, when a bank makes a decision about a mortgage
```

> Consider the following example. When a bank makes a decision about a mortgage

Reviewer 2: Consider the following example: when...

application, many factors are taken into consideration, including the credit
credit history, annual income, and loan size. This data goes through multiple
automated steps of analysis with numerous dependencies and decisions made
along the way. If the final decision does not satisfy the applicant,
the historical data is the first place to look for proof of authenticity,

> as well as for possible prejudice against the applicant. Data provenance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as well as for possible prejudice or model bias against the applicant. Data provenance
```

> enables data scientists to track the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
creates a complete audit trail that enables data scientists to track the
```

> progress from its origin to the final decision and make appropriate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data from its origin through to the final decision and make appropriate
```

Protection Regulation (GDPR) compliance requirements, monitoring data lineage
is becoming a necessity for many financial,

> biopharmaceutical, and other organizations that work with sensitive data.

Reviewer 2: A bit awkward. Maybe: ...is becoming a necessity for many organizations that work with sensitive data (including financial and biopharmaceutical)

Pachyderm implements provenance for both commits and repositories.

> Therefore, you can track revisions within one branch and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, you can track revisions of the data and
```

understand the connection between the data stored in one repository

> and the data that was used to calculate the result in the other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the results in the other
```

> repository. Therefore, you can track the data transformation process across

Reviewer: > Therefore, you can track the data transformation process across
multiple datasets.

Therefore isn't really used correctly here I dont think. Just remove this sentence IMO.

multiple datasets.

> Collaboration takes data provenance even further. You can make any dataset

Reviewer: > You can make any dataset
available to other members of your team. When many data scientists have
access to the same dataset, they can conduct their own experiments with
the data and identify better data analysis processes by using separate branches

This sentence is true, but doesn't really fit the idea of provenance. This is about branches. I think like below makes more sense:

"Data provenance takes collaboration even further. Provenance allows teams across the world to share, transform, and update data sets while automatically maintaining a complete audit trail so everything is 100% reproducible."

access to the same dataset, they can conduct their own experiments with
the data and identify better data analysis processes by using
separate branches.

The following diagram demonstrates how provenance works:

![Provenance example](../../images/provenance.png)

In the diagram above, you can see two input repositories called `parameters`
and `training-data`. The `training-data` repository continuously collects
data from an outside source. The training model pipeline combines the
data from these two repositories and runs tests to select the best
model.

Provenance helps you to understand how and why the best model was
selected and enables you to track the origin of the best model.
In the diagram above, the best model is represented with a purple
circle. By using provenance, you can find that the best model was
created from the commit **2** in the `training-data` repository
and the commit **1** in the `parameters` repository.

Also, Pachyderm provides the `flush commit` command that enables you
to track provenance downstream. That means that you can learn
in which output a certain commit has resulted.

**See Also:**

> - [Examining file provenance with flush commit](../../fundamentals/getting_data_out_of_pachyderm.html#examining-file-provenance-with-flush-commit)

Author: It's where it was originally I believe.  I haven't touched that section yet.
